I feel Tracy like this conversation is
really about like the magical object
that you don't you can't look at right
because it'll freeze you or maybe it's
the shining gold in the briefcase in
pulp fiction you can't see it. So all
we've done historically mostly is we've
attempted to figure out what it is by
observing its reflection onto the world,
which we observe that reflection, the
unemployment. And now this is an attempt
to see the unseeable and to actually
stare into the abyss at this crucial
number and find out what it truly is.
>> Everyone's been wondering what's in the
suitcase in Pulp Fiction. It was our
star.
>> It was our star all along.
[Music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe.
>> Yeah. Yes.
>> Recently.
>> Yes.
>> Recently, uh Steven Myron, who is chair
of the Council of Economic Adviserss and
also the newly confirmed Fed board
member. Yeah.
>> He made his first public speech since
joining the central bank. And do you
know what it was about?
>> Uh I do, but go on.
>> The neutral rate. the natural rate of
interest, RSAR.
>> Yes.
>> Basically all about RSTAR, which is like
pretty significant for his first speech.
>> I mean, to me, and this has come up on a
bunch of episodes lately. To me, this is
the multi-t trillion dollar question,
which is why is it, you know, what we're
here, we're according to September 24th,
2025. Why are long-term rates so much
higher? Why does the market perceive
that rates will have to be so much
higher in order for the Fed to hit its
inflation goals than uh it uh than the
market perceived in 2019? What changed
in the last six years or five years or
whatever? Well, also I mean ourstar has
always been something of a controversial
idea and people criticize it for being
this unobservable thing and you know
it's a hypothetical estimate that's
extracted from all this different stuff
like savings and spending and
productivity and demographics investment
you can go on and on and on but
>> climate immigration
>> yeah exactly but I think you know our
star is probably going to get even more
controversial or perhaps more under the
spotlight light is a way of putting it.
Um given that people like Myin speech
where he was arguing that the natural
rate of interest should be zero right
now which is very very different than
>> other sort of normal estimates out there
which has the natural rate of interest
at like 3.3 or 3.9%.
>> Something like that. Um, and so if you
think the neutral rate of interest is a
lot lower, uh, then then you would
assume that the Fed should be loosening
more. And conversely, if you think RSTAR
is high, which a lot of people have
argued in recent years, then you would
uh argue that the Fed, you know,
interest rates don't look that
restrictive at the moment.
>> So, I'll just say two things. I'm
probably something of an RSAR truther in
the specific sense that I doubt like
okay everyone agrees it's like quote
unobservable etc but I doubt that there
is actually some rate that will
magically bring the economy into balance
if we knew what it was.
>> Um that doesn't mean I don't find this
to be a conceptually useful conversation
>> and yet you don't believe in the term
premium.
>> I don't really believe in any any of
this stuff. No, that's not true. I am
very interested in setting aside whether
something could theoretically be
observed, whether one number could bring
everything into balance, all of these
things. Setting aside that question,
something has changed in the underlying
economy. If you want to call that a
neutral rate of interest, I guess I'm
totally fine with that. Um, but
something's changed and I want to know
what it is, but more importantly, I want
to know why.
>> Okay. All right. Well, we have the
perfect guest. We're going to be
speaking with Tom Orlick, who is of
course chief economist at Bloomberg
Economics. He's been on a number of
times before, and Jamie Rush, director
of global economics at Bloomberg
Economics, and together with Stephanie
Flanders, who is the head of Bloomberg
economics, of course, uh, and also the
host of the Trumpomics podcast, have
written a book all about the neutral
rate of interest,
>> a whole book about it.
>> Yeah. called the price of money, a guide
to the past, present, and future of the
natural rate of interest.
>> Amazing. I'm really excited.
>> All right, so let's get started. Uh Tom
and Jamie, thank you so much for coming
on Thoughts.
>> Great to be here. Thanks, Tracy. Thanks,
Jay.
>> Thanks for having us.
>> Well, first of all, congratulations on
the new book. And I got to say, it's
kind of ballsy to uh to tackle this
concept that a lot of people don't
believe in, excluding Joe. Um, and you
know that tends to generate a lot of
criticism and maybe it's even ballsier
to publish your own model um, so that
everyone can see what the estimates
actually are. Uh, I mean that as a
genuine compliment, but why a book on
the neutral rate? What prompted it?
>> So I actually recall a a tweet from Joe
a while ago where uh, he took aim at
books as a concept.
>> Oh yes.
>> So not only do I not believe in our star
or anything, I don't even believe in the
premise of book. No, I do believe in
>> Joe believes all books should be a
tweet.
>> That's right. Keep going.
>> So, we've written about a concept Joe
doesn't believe in in a format that Joe
doesn't support. So, we've been
incredibly lucky to be on the on the
podcast. Um, so why now? Um, well, um, I
think there's a couple of, uh, ways to
answer that question. Uh, the first is,
I mean, this is really important, right?
Um, we talk about the neutral rate of
interest. Um but really a different way
of saying it is it's the cost of
borrowing in the economy, right? Um and
the cost of borrowing is incredibly
consequential for ministers of finance.
It's incredibly consequential for
businesses, for households, for
investors. Um so it's always a good time
to write about neutral rate, interest
rates, the cost of borrowing. Um why
specifically now? Um well, it's because
something really important has changed.
Um from the late 1980s to the mid2010s,
the global economy was characterized by
too much saving and not enough
investment. Uh and in that state of
affairs, the neutral rate of interest,
the cost of borrowing was continually
falling. Um what's happened in the last
decade? Well, that dynamic has swung
into reverse. Um, and now we have less
saving, more investment, and that means
the neutral rate of interest. The cost
of borrowing for the US Treasury and for
everyone else is going up.
>> I like this framing. So, it's less about
the idea that there is some rate that
will bring everything into balance
magically, etc. because I think a lot of
people intuitively understand why you
know that's not such a you know I think
that probably makes a lot of people
uncomfortable but it is seems
objectively true or real that the cost
of money or the cost of borrowing has
gone up and so we can talk about that uh
specifically let's talk about the cost
of borrowing today like it is more
expensive in how much more expensive is
it to borrow money today by some measure
than it was say pre-COVID
>> wait Just before we do this, can we get
like a um three sentence definition of
how you view RTA star? I feel like we
should define our terms before we start.
>> Excellent idea.
So, so RAR, the natural rate of interest
is what balances demand for investment
and saving in the economy. And when
those two things are in balance, the
economy is on trend and inflation is
roughly at target.
>> All right, that's a simple definition.
>> I like that. All right. So, why has it
gone up? I mean, this is the big uh this
is the big question, right? But
actually, no, before we say why has it
gone up, how much has it gone up or has
it in fact gone up versus the pre-COVID
environment? Let's start with that.
>> Well, if if we cast our mind back to
that that COVID experience, there was a
period where governments could basically
be paid to borrow in real terms.
interest rates were so low for so long,
so far across the yield curve that they
could borrow without having to worry
about whether they'd pay it back. So,
you can see that the the real world
implications of that and the behavior
that we saw during the pandemic, the
borrowing that happened is the interest
rate was enormously consequential and a
big part of that. Um, we're not in that
world now. Interest rates, treasury
yields in excess of 4% are much higher,
much more burdensome. And now we're
seeing that the costs of those policies
manifest in in budgets today.
>> So I remember way back in 2016, Goldman
Sachs put out this note arguing that the
Fed had a big new idea to justify
keeping rates low basically. And the
argument was that our star was qu was
low and so you know monetary policy
wasn't actually that that loose at the
time um even though benchmark rates were
already pretty low. And the Goldman
analysts had this chart in their note uh
where they basically looked at mentions
of thematic ideas in Fed speeches and
press releases and things like that. And
indeed you could see that starting in
2016 mentions of our start going up and
you know they basically came off of
nothing for like the previous decade. No
one was talking about the natural rate
of interest. I know our star itself is
an old idea because I read the book and
there's a chunky chapter on the history
um and development of the entire
concept. But am I right in thinking that
there has been a resurgence in interest
in our star over the past decade or so?
>> Chunky seems like a neutral adjective uh
Tracy right
>> an informative chapter I should say. Um
okay so um I think I think there clearly
has right um and I think one of the
reasons for that um is because the state
of the world has changed right um in the
run-up to the global financial crisis um
didn't feel like there were sort of
fundamental issues with how monetary
policy was operating right um interest
rates moved up interest rates moved down
the economy responded in the way which
um the textbooks would suggest best. Um,
but in the aftermath of the financial
crisis, we're in this extended period of
economic malaise, right? Um, and from a
monetary policy perspective, it was hard
to explain. Interest rates are on the
floor. There've been a huge amount of
quantitative easing. Um, and yet
unemployment rates remain stubbornly
high. Growth remains stubbornly low. Um,
why was that? Um and that's one of the
reasons why this neutral rate of
interest rose in profile as an
explanatory factor because if the
neutral rate of interest has come down
um if it's come down very far well that
means that central banks have to do a
lot to stimulate the economy um and if
the neutral rate of interest is close to
zero well that effectively means that
central banks are out of firepower. They
can't take interest rates low enough to
stimulate growth. This is a very
important point actually because and
again just let's stay in the 2010s here
when interest rates were at zero or near
zero for a long time. You probably heard
a lot of people in the financial press
say oh you know the Fed is super loose
monetary policy etc. Uh how long will
the Fed continue to print money or
whatever. And yet looking at the actual
results in the real economy as you've
described unemployment remaining
stubbornly high inflation consistently
under shooting which in retrospect very
nice problem to have I think we should
have appreciated it more at the time
really not a problem at all in my
opinion the implication though and we
could have understood this from Milton
Friedman and some of his talk about
Japan was that actually implicitly we
were still running tight monetary policy
even with nominal rates basically at
their physical floor.
>> Yeah. So I so I guess during that period
interest rates were low, the economy was
failing to gain traction. Um and and
policy makers
were puzzling over it. And so I so one
of the thing and and actually the the
puzzle continues, right? Policy makers
still don't know how restrictive policy
is. They have they have they infer what
they think the natural rate should be by
looking around them seeing what's
happening to unemployment see what's
happening to inflation but they don't
know and so what one of the things that
we did and we tried to achieve in our
book is to rather than inferring the
natural rate of interest we looked over
a broader sweep of history and tried to
pin down the explanatory drivers of the
rate of interest to try and give shed
some light on why these things are as
they are why interest rates fell so much
why there was an inflection point around
the panic pandemic and why we think
interest rates may therefore go forward
go upwards in the future. So it was for
for for us the exercise the book was
really about trying to pin down the
drivers and then tell a story around
those drivers so we can think about it
in the future.
>> I feel Tracy like this conversation is
really about like the magical object
that you don't you can't look at right
because it'll freeze you or maybe it's
the shining gold and the briefcase in
pulp fiction you can't see it. So all
we've done historically mostly is we've
attempted to figure out what it is by
observing its reflection onto the world,
which we observe that reflection, the
unemployment. And now this is an attempt
to see the unseeable and to actually
stare into the abyss at this crucial
number and find out what it truly is.
>> Everyone's been wondering what's in the
suitcase in cult fiction. It was our
star.
>> It was our star all along.
>> Um, okay. Well, on that note, I mean, I
take the point that most of the book is
about the specific drivers of RSTAR, but
you do come up with a model um and you
do come up with an estimate uh for the
sort of long run trajectory of RSTAR.
Can you walk us through how your model
actually differs from some of the other
models out there? because I think that
might help us to understand, you know,
when people say this is unobservable or
we're sort of staring at the reflection
of the economy trying to come up with
this hypothetical uh number. Um what
we're actually doing or what economists
are actually doing.
>> Yeah, of course. So the the conventional
way or at least the way that's been
gained a lot of popularity over the past
couple of decades has been uh the
Lawback and Williams model of the
natural rate of interest on mutual rate
of interest and what they do is they
they look at what's going on with
inflation what's going on with
unemployment
um and they and they judge they try to
judge from that how far current interest
rates must be away from the neutral
rate. So if interest rates are very
restrictive, very far away from the
neutral rate, inflation is going to be
very low and unemployment is going to be
very high and vice versa. Um, and this
this has the the benefit of giving you a
feel for what's going on right now based
on observable data, but it doesn't tell
you anything about why the interest rate
is what it is. Um, uh, or therefore
where it may where it may go. And so
what we tried to do um was was pin the
the natural rate down by using some some
actual data and some theory. So if we
think about what the natural rate is and
what it is that determines it well it's
it's the price of money. It's the price
and that's determined by in the same way
as anything else is determined um by the
supply and the demand. So on the one
hand you've got investment demand and
then you've got the supply of savings.
And when these two things move, it
shifts the rate of interest. And because
of that fundamental theoretical
understanding, you're able to think
about well, what is it that determines
investment? Why do people want to
invest? Uh why do people want to save?
What is it about them that or different
types of people or or different age
people uh that affects their saving
behavior? And so you can you go from
that theory to these drivers of the
these theoretical drivers of of
behavior. And then you can try and try
and pin it down empirically. And that's
exactly what we did. So we fed into this
model um what what economists generally
think are the main drivers of of these
investment and saving decisions. Um, so
there are quite a few of them and and
then we estimate their relationship with
the interest rates over the sweep of say
50 years
and that really is is the that that
really was what supported our our
results and it allows us of course then
to think about how those drivers may
change. M
>> just in uh keeping in mind Tracy's
mention in the beginning of defining
terms investment just so we're clear
this is like real investment right so
this is hiring impulse capital expend
like what does investment mean in your
terms
>> yeah so we're thinking specifically
actually the the the capital expenditure
okay so um
>> I mean let's give you an let's take an
example like AI so AI
>> AI is great. I can't do it on a Casio
calculator. I have to buy something to
make it work. I have to spend money. I
have to invest uh in chips in in fabs uh
to reap the benefits of those frontier
technologies. So, as AI lifts the growth
rate of the of the economy, it also
raises the investment needs. And so,
this is the this is one of the linkages
that we kind of explore is like what is
the relationship between overall growth
in the economy and productivity growth.
the investment need that creates and
then therefore the the knock-on
consequence for interest rates. So I
mean whether it's ICT revolution in the
'90s, uh railroads or anything else, uh
these things all have impacts on
investment and therefore the natural
rates of interest.
>> And just to define the other term when
you talk about savings is this mean
because this you know in a sense a
savings loan to a bank etc. This is the
impulse to have sort of liquidity,
right? Or at any given moment the
various actors the desire to hold
essentially dollar or euro or whatever
liquidity.
>> Yeah, that's right. I mean, okay, I
guess you can think about it on the the
the individual level. So, I want to save
right now. As I get older, I'll want to
spend those savings in my retirement.
So, that's one of the key drivers of
saving behavior. Uh, China,
>> China used to save a lot. Now it saves a
little um but state actors also matter
to the global supply of saving uh and
investment. So yes, it's it's everybody
and it touches on everything.
>> Yeah. One of the light bulb moments for
me reading this book was kind of um
touching the idea of generational
warfare. And the idea that from the
1980s onwards, baby boomers started
saving a lot and so the supply of
savings went up and the neutral rate
went down. And that's the reason why I
never earned interest on my bank account
until two years ago. Um, okay. Serious
question. In your model, what's the
biggest driver of the neutral rate
actually going up in the future?
>> Well, in our model, the the main driver
really uh is is this saving by
governments or spending by governments.
So there are a number of I mean if you
look at the recent past the experience
of the pandemic uh if you look at the
the path of the deficit in the US and
other countries since then what we've
learned uh is that governments like to
spend and they've continued to do so
even though uh it's become more costly
and a lot of that reflects uh politics.
Politics are fragmented. it's hard to
get support around closing budget
deficits. And so governments just
continue to spend which is tilting the
balance between investment and saving in
the global economy. Uh and of course
they have big outlays coming up. Defense
spending uh is going up in much of the
in much of the advanced world. uh the
need to green the energy infrastructure
again in some parts of the world is also
uh crimping saving and then just that
that fundamental point that you've got
aging populations increasing outlays for
for dealing with that on health uh for
dealing with that on on on benefits and
pensions. Um all of this is just making
it very difficult to keep spending down.
>> I think this it also inter intersects um
with the argument which you uh kicked
off with Joe and Tracy uh from Steven
Myron. Um uh so Steven Myron um the new
Fed governor um has made the case that
the policies from the Trump
administration are going to have a big
negative impact on the neutral rate of
interest. Um and that's why he's
advocating for very aggressive uh rate
cuts um to keep policy accommodative. Um
now um the argument we make in our book
um actually uh points in the opposite
direction, right? Um, if you think about
the policies of the Trump
administration, uh, well, firstly, we've
got the one big beautiful bill, um,
which adds trillions and trillions of
dollars to government borrowing over the
next decade. Um, that significantly
pushes up the neutral rate of interest.
Um, and if you think more broadly about
Trump policies, um, well, it's kind of
the end of the grand bargain which
America has struck with the world,
right? Um, one way of thinking about the
last few decades is America said to the
world, "We will buy your stuff and we
will defend you, but you have to finance
us. You have to send your saving to the
United States by US treasuries." Um,
well, what the Trump administration now
is saying is, "Well, we're not going to
buy your stuff and we're not going to
defend you, right?" Um, so it wouldn't
be that surprising if the rest of the
world said, "Well, if you're not going
to buy our stuff and you're not going to
defend us, we're not going to finance
you anymore." Right? Um, so Steven
Myron, who's a super smart, super
articulate guy, and if you've not had
him on OddLots already, you should.
>> We have.
>> We have, and we'll have him again
sometime.
>> Um,
um,
>> fan favorite episode
>> makes the case makes the case that the
Trump administration has significantly
lowered the neutral rate of interest,
uh, and that's why the Fed needs to cut
aggressively. Um,
the model which Jamie developed, the
argument we make in our book, actually
points in the opposite direction. Yeah.
On this note, do you get the sense that
central bankers, policy makers,
economists sometimes use RSTAR as a
crutch to justify whatever they're
doing? Like if you think rates should be
lower, then you can just argue that
RSTAR is in fact low. Um, and RSTAR is
this unobservable thing that's based on
your own estimates. So you can argue
about it, but no one's ever going to
prove what RTAR actually is. And if you
think that rates should be higher, then
you just argue that well actually
something has structurally changed and
the natural rate of interest is in fact
quite high. Do people use it in that
way? It feels like it.
>> Well, I mean what one thing I suppose is
that with our star um you're never
beholden to a prediction really, are
you?
>> So if you say I think interest rates
should be lower because the economy is
going to tank and then the economy
doesn't tank, you just look like a bit
of an idiot. But if you say, "I think
rate should be lower because our star is
actually lower." Then no one's ever
going to come along and say, "Oh,
actually, you're completely wrong
because I've got irrefutable proof that
our star was actually in fact higher."
So, I think it's probably a safe way to
to express your views if you just have a
belief, an inner belief that rates need
to be lower. Um, but it is perhaps one
that's less easy to hold to account.
When we talk about Trump policies and
their effect on our star, another thing
that I think about a lot is um you talk
about this grand bargain falling apart.
The trade and every country wanting to
be increasingly more self-sufficient in
various goods, which strikes me as
something that once again adds to the
investment impulse. The US is worried
that maybe one day we won't be able to
rely on Taiwan for chips. Europe might
be worried that if the U uh that the US
may not be a great supplier for whatever
the US supplies to Europe etc. Does a
sort of fracturing of global trade which
may or may not be happening contribute
to a positive investment impulse in a
sense and therefore uh raise our star.
>> Yeah, I think there's a couple of
dynamics at work there Joe. Um so the
first one is the one you mentioned. Um,
if everyone wants to make their own
stuff at home, um, then clearly there
has to be a massive amount of capital
spending so everyone can build their own
everything, right? We can't just have
semiconductor fabs in Taiwan. We need
semiconductor fabs in Germany and Japan
and the United States. Um, and that
means there needs to be much more
investment spending. Um the second
dynamic um and this is something uh
which one of our co-authors Dan Hansen
gets into um in the book um is around um
globalization and the cost of investment
goods right um think about how much more
computing power you get for your money
today than you did in 1980 right there's
just been a massive increase in
productivity um a massive increase in
the amount of computing power you get
for a certain certain amount of money um
and that means you don't have to spend
as much um in order to buy investment
goods. Um well, if globalization now
breaks down and we come to the end of
that kind of productivity miracle in
technology, um well, that means that the
cost of investment goods is going to
stop falling. you're going to need to
pay more to buy a certain amount of
technology, a certain amount of
investment goods and that is also going
to be a factor pushing up the natural
rate.
So on a related note, I mean we we have
had a number of supply shocks in recent
years uh you know during the pandemic um
during the Russian invasion of Ukraine
all that stuff which has led a lot of
governments to start thinking about how
to solve these sort of choke points or
shortages in the system. What does that
actually mean for central bank policy if
you know perhaps the neutral rate of
interest is going up because of these
supply shocks because you need more
investment but at the same time the
central bank raising rates doesn't
necessarily produce more wheat or more
shipping capacity and things like that.
How should central banks respond? Well,
there are obviously going to be periods
um where inflation just moves higher uh
because we because of the supply shocks
you mentioned, I think. Um and we should
expect those to happen with increasing
frequency, right? So, climate change is
is going to make it harder to to produce
stuff. It's going to make food price
shocks more uh more common. Um it's
going to create other distortions which
which hit production. So central banks
of the future will perhaps have to keep
interest rates higher anyway just to
kind of prevent those shocks from
feeding through to inflation
expectations and therefore uh keeping
inflation away from targets. It's
because supply shocks really are very
different from demand shocks uh as you
guys know I'm sure and but you know
history was was dominated at least in
the last couple of decades by demand
shocks and and now we're seeing a world
which is dominated increasingly by
supply shocks and actually it's just a
different playbook for central banks.
>> Agree with all of that. I think there's
other there's another dynamic for
central banks which is also going to be
um a force for higher interest rates um
going forwards and that's the challenge
to central bank independence. Um, right.
Uh, we've talked about, uh, Steven Myron
coming onto the board of governors at
the Fed. Um, well, guess what? He's
still holding on to his position, um, as
the chair of the Council of Economic
Adviserss, senior member of Donald
Trump's, um, economic policy team. Um,
having someone from the president's team
serve on the Fed concurrently, that's
unprecedented going back to 1936.
um and raises significant questions
about Fed independence and so the Fed's
credibility as an inflation fighter.
Right? Um now we've not really seen this
in markets so far. Markets have been
paying surprisingly little attention um
to this dynamic. Um but if the Fed does
lose its independence, if the Fed does
lose its credibility as an inflation
fighter, then markets are going to start
demanding an additional premium um to
hold long-term US Treasury debt, right?
Um so you're going to have all of these
structural forces um less saving, more
investment. You're going to have the
greater preponderance of supply shocks,
uh which Jamie spoke about as an
additional driver of higher inflation.
and you're going to have risks to Fed
independence. Um, and all of these are
forces which are going to be pushing up
Yeah. um, long-term borrowing costs for
the US Treasury and because the Treasury
rate is the anchor for global markets,
also pushing up borrowing costs for
everybody else. I'm glad you brought
this up because even setting aside the
sort of formal risks to Fed
independence, there are others who
question the degree to which the Fed
still takes its own 2% inflation
targeting uh target seriously, including
our own colleague here, Anna Wong, who
says implicitly, if you look at what's
going on, it looks like they're no
longer targeting 2%, they're targeting
2.8%. Tim Dwey, an economist we've had,
says, "You know what? As long as
inflation is below 3%, we think the Fed
is mostly concerned about the labor side
of the mandate." So, setting aside
Myron's role or Trump's truth social
posts when you look at markets, is there
sort of growing belief that the Fed just
does not take 2% as seriously as once it
did?
>> Yeah. So it's a powerful argument uh
which Anna, our chief US economist
makes. Um and uh part of that argument
is that um this divergence between what
the Fed should be doing if they take 2%
inflation seriously and what they're
actually doing um didn't start under
Trump. It started under Biden. Um, and
actually it was those rate cuts in the
runup to the 2024 election which were
the beginning of the Fed diverging from
a kind of pure apolitical tailor rule
path. Right. Um so um as I'm sure you've
seen Joe and Tracy uh there's not much
um which Republicans and Democrats agree
on u in America right now. Um, one point
of bipartisan consensus, um,
unfortunately, um, is that there's too
much politics in the Fed.
>> Uh, Tracy, someone once told me that the
two things that everyone agrees on, by
the way, in America,
>> are that, um, Dolly Parton is good and
that Epstein didn't kill himself. We can
add a third, that there is too much
politics in monetary policym to the
three points of, uh, bipartisan
agreement. That's going to be my new
conversation starter at dinner is for
everyone. Just ask them if they think
there's too much politics uh in Fed
policy.
>> Okay. Um
>> Joe mentioned markets just then. So I
think when people think of the era of
low interest rates um and low natural
rates, people think about high asset
prices, right? There tends to be a
correlation there. If the price of money
is going up, what does that actually
mean for asset prices?
>> Well, I it kind of depends on the
reason. Um, and as we sort of talked
about earlier about the the kind of role
of AI, well, AI, AI can raise equity
values because it's a frontier
technology that's going to potentially
transform the way the economy operates
and create lots of profits along the
way. Um, it can it's also going to suck
in a load of capital uh and make it less
available for others which is going to
drive up interest rates. So, if it if
that's the source, you can see this
world continuing. you can see that
interest rates will continue to rise as
investments sucked into the AI nexus.
Um, but the if so long as the the actual
promise is realized, you see equity
values going up as well, which is kind
of a slightly unusual arrangement, but
then we don't have technological
revolutions every day.
>> Yeah, I'm glad you brought up AI because
I wanted to go there. You know, I've
seen uh Jason Ferman, he has
characterized AI spending as being
almost quasi fiscal in nature because it
has this there's not that we haven't got
the productivity payoff yet, but there's
this incredible flood of money coming
in. So, it sort of has this perhaps
crowding out effect. Neil Qashqari gave
a interesting um posted an I guess it
was a blog post called three questions.
I think he posted it last week, but he
talks about RSTAR and he about how this
higher neutral rate of interest may be
appropriate giving the given the intense
pace of um AI investment that's going
on, but also it may not be appropriate,
you know, for the housing sector. Uh
that's not what's bringing to balance
and we see this decline. Could there be
two R stars? Could there be this Rstar
that's sort of the high-tech economy
booming, but it's not an it's not the
Rstar that brings the rest of the
economy into balance?
>> It's a it's a good question, Joe, and I
think people do think about this concept
um quite a lot in in the sense that
there's a maybe there's an Astar which
keeps the economy balanced and maybe
there's an Astar which keeps the
financial sector and financial markets
balanced and and not getting carried
away with themselves. Um, and there's no
guarantee or any particular reason to
think that they should be the same,
which implies then that you've got this
policy trade-off. You've got you what's
good for the economy may not be good for
for financial stability. And so that's
that's another thing for central banks
to be grappling with in the in the years
to come. H um when it comes to the
composition of investment, one topic
that uh gets a lot of attention nowadays
is the idea of ddollarization
and perhaps people buying fewer US
assets, perhaps people, you know, h
choosing to hedge those US assets. And
we have seen some very big buyers um of
securities like foreign central banks
actually slow down their purchases of US
treasuries or US mortgage bonds and
things like that. How would that affect
the neutral rate of interest if you know
there's less money flowing into dollars
specifically or dollar assets?
>> So I think there's a there's a number of
reasons why we would expect less money
flowing into dollars, right? So one
really big reason uh is that China has
changed its FX policy. Um for uh more
than a decade, China was pegging the
yuan to the dollar and that meant the
PBOC needed to hoover up the whole trade
surplus and park that in treasuries to
stop the UN appreciating. Um second big
important reason um is that shift in the
grand bargain between the US and the
rest of the world. Um, think about how
um the US and Europe acted to freeze
Russia's FX reserves following um
Putin's um full-scale invasion of
Ukraine. Um that's a kind of shift in
the grand bargain. Um and it tells
Russia, but also everybody else, guess
what? There's geopolitics in the dollar,
right? And if you put your assets in the
United States, there's a risk you might
lose them. Um and of course the tariffs
themselves are a factor. That huge hike
in tariffs that we saw on Liberation
Day. Um well that's the US saying we're
going to play a smaller part in the
global trade system in the future. Um
and if the US is going to play a smaller
part in the global trade system, well
the utility of holding dollars as a way
of settling import and export
transactions goes down. Um, so there's a
lot of reasons to be concerned about
this ddollarization trend. Um, and um,
Jamie may have a more sophisticated way
of thinking about this this than me. Um,
but basically I think about buying
dollars and buying treasuries as pretty
strongly correlated in this context. So
if the rest of the world is
ddollarizing, that also means they're
buying less US treasuries. That means
less demand for US treasuries. And so
it's another force pushing US borrowing
costs higher.
>> I think all that is that was all
entirely true. Um and I guess one thing
when you're trying to think next to the
the linkage with global borrowing costs
is is what happens to those those
savings instead.
>> Um now if you can't find anywhere else
any other assets to buy in place of US
treasuries um what are you going to do?
Well quite possibly you'll end up
spending them. Um and particularly if
you think about the geopolitical context
you think about the impact of tariffs on
China for example well now there's
actually an extra incentive to spend
more and if you think about in those
terms then actually that that policy
itself is going to shift the
international balance of investment and
saving again away from savings partly
because it's just too too hard to save
anywhere safe.
>> Um my computer just for did a force
reboot. I had a great chart on my
screen, but now I can't look at it. But
um December
27th or whatever the last day of trading
was in 2019, the US 10 year was about
1.8 and today it's probably like 1
4.12%.
Maybe both of you get list your five
reasons in order. I know this the tenure
is not the RSR, but you know, for our
purposes for for podcast talk, we could
just sort of
>> ourstar is everywhere.
>> Yeah. like in maybe rank the five for
both of you in order. Rank the five
major things or however many you want to
that have contributed most significantly
to this uh regime change or price
change.
>> Maybe I'll take the easy ones of course.
Uh so here's my here's my three. Uh so
firstly is demographics. Um, for decades
we had the baby boomers in prime working
age saving money for retirement. Um,
that pushed the neutral rate down. Now
they're retiring, spending down their
savings. That's a powerful force pushing
the neutral rate up. Um, second is debt.
Um for decades uh from the 1980s to the
global financial crisis uh borrowing
from the US and from other major
advanced economies leaving aside uh
Japan uh was low and stable. Um since
the global financial crisis and again
since the COVID pandemic there's been a
massive increase in government
borrowing. Um and when there's more
government borrowing um that pushes the
natural rate of interest higher. Um and
then the third um deglobalization.
Um so one of the factors driving neutral
rates lower was that Ben Bernani savings
glut hypothesis. Chinese saving,
petroate saving from Saudi and others
heading into the United States. Um the
forces of deglobalization have now
brought that to an end. So conveniently,
3Ds, demographics, debt,
deglobalization, all pushing neutral
rates higher.
>> Very good. Jamie, you have to beat that
now.
>> I mean, I think I'd only add one extra
to be honest. The and and that's AI. So
when we were when we were putting pen to
paper for the book, um, chat GPT wasn't
really a thing. That's when we started
out. Uh, by the time we published the
book, it's very much a thing. Um, and I
we can already see that the the
transformational impact that's having on
the investment landscape. Whether that
has a transformational impact on the
economic landscape remains to be seen,
but I think that is now playing out
faster than we thought. We had a
scenario in our book uh about what that
could do to the natural rate. No
surprise, it pushes it up. Um, and I
think we're actually in a world now
where that scenario is basically coming
to pass.
>> I'm going to help everyone out here with
a little bit of marketing. So Tom you
mentioned the three Ds uh debt,
demographics, uh del globalization, AI
we can rebrand as data centers. So
that's a fourth D. And then the fifth
one which you guys talked about but you
didn't hit your list and that is defense
spending. So really we could talk about
the five Ds demographics deglobalization
data centers and defense as having
contribute this is this we we've come to
something we could really market this I
think the four of us together the 5Ds
that have caused the price of money to
get so much higher in the last six
years. Well, that can be the next book
perhaps. Although the current one talks
a lot about all of these obviously.
>> I think that could be the um the title
to this episode.
>> The 5Ds.
>> The 5Ds that pushing up the price of
money. Yeah.
>> Yeah, that would work. Um okay. Well, on
that note, Tom and Jamie, thank you so
much for joining OddLots. Really
appreciate it.
>> Thanks so much for having us, Joe Tracy.
Always a blast.
>> Thank you so much. That was great.
>> Pleasure. Thanks, guys.
>> Thank you, Joe. That was very fun.
Always a fun time having our Bloomberg
economics colleagues on the podcast.
>> I think I'm our star pill. I believe in
it now. I believe that there is some
number that if only we could stare at it
directly, we could kind of bring things
into balance.
>> I think it's a useful concept for sure
and it's something to aim for and it's
kind of a framework under which like an
umbrella under which you can put all
your thoughts about the economy
basically. That said, I mean, Tom and
Jamie and Stephanie lay out a very
convincing argument for why they think
our star is going to be higher in the
future.
>> Meanwhile, you have people like Myin
>> arguing the exact opposite. Um, we can
debate whether it's convincing or not,
but it does feel like ourstar is not a
method of achieving consensus. Let's
just put it that way.
>> No, it's not. But um uh and to your
point, anyone
if you can't make an argument for either
our star going higher or lower in the
future, it's like an intelligence test.
Any intelligent person should be able to
argue both sides at any given time.
Exactly. Right. You can always come up
with an eloquent nice sounding argument
for any direction. This is true. The one
thing I'll say is that while our star
may not truly be observable, etc. And
maybe there isn't one number that
satisfies the whole economy. What's that
line? It's like all models are fake, but
some are at least useful. It strikes me
that it may be a fake concept, but a
useful concept. And that plugging some
of these factors in, what can we
anticipate about where defense spending
is going to go? What can we anticipate
about the nature of savings savings or
spending decisions among an aging
population? These are useful things to
try to wrap our head around. And maybe
these could be this could be a useful
exercise even if the underlying concept
is still like a little h you know.
>> Yeah. Except that a lot of people argue
that the models are garbage too.
>> No, of course. Of course.
>> Except for this one obviously.
>> Of course. Everyone's going to argue for
everything. But I'm just saying like
it's I mean you can just go total
nihilist and think that the profession
of economics is nonsense. But but it
does strike me as useful to say there is
going to be a lot more spending here
because real reasons that are happening.
What is that going to do to the
availability of money or capital or
whatever?
>> I think that makes sense. Although one
thing I would like to see more study of
is like maybe not not necessarily our
star and whether it's too high or too
low but like the actual impact of
interest rates on economic growth like
the sensitivity of growth to rates. It's
a great question and that's I think one
of the other big sort of mysteries of
the last several years which is how do
you get the biggest interest rate hike
in decades and the growth trajectory
barely budges and the unemployment or
the employment trajectory uh barely
budges. These are like things you know I
think a lot of people would have thought
>> in retrospect oh we're definitely going
to go to recession with this rapid pace
of rate hikes. the degree to which
policy actually affects the real economy
in predictable ways. Highly uh highly
contested.
>> Yeah. Well, maybe that can be Tom and
Jaime's next book. Yeah.
>> Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the All Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like and subscribe or leave
a comment down below.
>> Thanks for watching.
[Music]